.. _release-1.3.15:

############################
Synfig 1.3.15 Release Notes
############################

.. _release-1.3.15  Critical fixes:

Critical fixes
--------------
* Fixed issue when copying skeletons from one file to another. Previously this was resulting in corrupted file, but now it isn't.

.. _release-1.3.15  Advanced Outline fixes:

Advanced Outline fixes
----------------------
* Fixed glitches when moving Widthpoints on unlooped Advanced Outline (`issue #1401 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1401>`_).
* Fix Incorrect position of Widthpoints on Homogenous Advanced Outline (`issue #1431 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1431>`_).
* Fixed Widthpoints that were wrongly computed on non-homogenous Advanced Outline (`issue #1523 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1523>`_).
* Fixed "Link to Spline": now places vertex into correct position when Spline is looped (`issue #1467 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1467>`_).
* Fixed rendering of Advanced Outline width point tips (`issue #1480 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1480>`_).
* DashItem Offset and Length parameters now use consistent units when editing them (`issue #1265 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1265>`_).

.. _release-1.3.15  Windows version fixes:

Windows version fixes
---------------------
* Fixed issues opening and exporting of files with multibyte (i.e. Arabic) symbols in filename.
* Fixed random crashes when editing splines (`issue #1442 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1442>`_).

.. _release-1.3.15  UI/UX improvements:

UI/UX improvements
------------------

* Removed unused Change Preview Quality menu item.
* Activate widget_filename right after user chooses file via button/file dialog (`issue #1425 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1425>`_).
* Homogenous parameter of Advanced Outline is enabled and static by default.
* Set Animation Speed parameter of Noise Distort Layer as static by default.
 

.. _release-1.3.15  Other bugfixes:

Other bugfixes
--------------

* Fixed crash when exporting with "pngspritesheet" target (`issue #356 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/356>`_).
* Fixed crash when removing spline vertex too fast.
* Fixed crashes related with exceptions thrown in GTK event callback handlers.
* Fixed crash when undoing creation of a moved/changed vertex of spline.
* Fixed crash when unexporting value node (`issue #231 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/231>`_).
* Fixed time and delta values in tooltip while dragging in Graph panel (`issue #1405 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1405>`_).
* Fixed renaming layer set affecting other names (`issue #1146 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1146>`_).
* Fixed initial value for filename entry in Render Settings dialog.
