.. _release-1.4.2:

############################
Synfig 1.4.2 Release Notes
############################

Synfig Studio 1.4.2 delivers some improvements and critical bugfixes. Please read below for details.

Improved export for Web
------------------------

The Lottie exporter plugin has gained new capabiilities and includes all improvements made during Google Summer of Code 2020. Here is what's new:

* Added support for exporting Advanced Outline layer (`#2199 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2199>`_) and Blur layer (`#1505 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1505>`_).
* Added support for exporting Outline layer without variable widths (`#1647 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1647>`_).
* Fix converter methods not working with radius of simple circle layer (`#1101 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1101>`_).
* Added support for variable gamma correction (`#1174 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1174>`_).
* Added support for converters: sine, cos, integer, linear gradient, aTan2, Vector angle, radial_composite, radial gradient, vector x, vector y, power, dot product, logarithm, reciprocal, range, vector length, not (`#1236 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1236>`_ `#1254 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1254>`_ `#1286 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1286>`_ `#1363 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1363>`_ `#1409 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1409>`_ `#1447 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1447>`_ `#1446 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1446>`_ `#1516 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1516>`_ `#1515 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1515>`_ `#1593 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1593>`_ `#1586 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1586>`_ `#1619 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1619>`_ `#1606 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1606>`_ `#1650 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1650>`_ `#1587 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1587>`_).
* Improved support for exported values (`#2182 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2182>`_).
* Use non-minified `bodymovin.js` script to avoid code obfuscation (`#2202 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2202>`_).

Better handling of shortcuts
----------------------------
* Basic implementation of Keyboard Shortcut Editor (`#2160 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2160>`_)(`#2173 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2173>`_)

TODO: Screenshot here

* Changed shortcut/hotkeys for improving usability (preferring single keys) and compability with other apps like Inkscape (PR `#1769 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1769>`_) (PR `#1776 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1776>`_) (PR `#1811 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1811>`_) (PR `#1823 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1823>`_) (PR `#1848 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1848>`_) (PR `#1855 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1855>`_) (PR `#1953 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1953>`_) (PR `#2033 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2033>`_) (PR `#2172 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2172>`_)

TODO: Screenshots for menus with shortcuts

* Added ``=`` to "Zoom in" (as an alternative ``Ctrl =``)
* Added ``-`` to "Zoom out" (as an alternative ``Ctrl -``)
* ``Ctrl Shit z`` became ``0`` to "Zoom to fit" (``Ctrl 0`` also works)
* ``Ctrl <`` became ``Shift <`` to "Go to previous second"
* ``Ctrl >`` became ``Shift >`` to "Go to next second"
* Added ``Ctrl Shift <`` to "Go to start"
* Added ``Ctrl Shift >`` to "Go to end"
* ``Ctrl p`` became ``Spacebar`` to "Play/Pause"
* On MacOS, "Undo" now uses ``⌘ z`` (Command key instead of Control) 
* For "Redo", use ``Ctrl y`` on MS Windows, ``Ctrl Shift z`` on Linux and ``Command Shift z`` on MacOS, instead of ``Ctrl r``
* All tools shortcuts are remapped to single keys, avoid use of ``Alt`` that led to some UX problems for some locales
* Added shortcut for Cutout tool (``c``)
* Added shortcut for toggling Animate mode (``Ctrl Spacebar``) (PR `#2033 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2033>`_)

UI/UX improvements
------------------
* single click for edit parameters of any type (PR `#1337 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1337>`_) (PR `#1351 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1351>`_), (PR `#1325 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1325>`_).
* TimeLoop valuenode now editable via workspace (PR `#2066 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2066>`_)
* Close tabs with middle mouse click (PR `#2107 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2107>`_) (PR `#2120 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2120>`_) (PR `#2210  <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2120>`_)
* LinkableValueNode now provides methods for inverse manipulation (PR `#2057 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2057>`_)
* add menu item "Undock panel" to Panel tab (PR `#1929 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1929>`_) (PR `#2109 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2109>`_)

Bugfixes
--------------
* Fixed incorrect background restoration on animated GIFs with transparent background (`#2134  <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2134>`_).
* Fixed crash when user drags a Group layer to a child group (`#2110 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/2110>`_) (PR `#2116 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2116>`_).
* Fixed crash in Spline Width and return of improper type in Spline converters (PR `#1890 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1890>`_).
* Exported canvas can be reopened again after closing (PR `#2092 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2092>`_).
* Fixed action "Duplicate Layer" for Skeleton Layer and their bone links (PR `#2059 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2059>`_).
* Fixed action "Duplicate Layer" for Skeleton Deformation Layer and their bone links (PR `#2071 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2071>`_).
* Fixed error that prevented convert to dot-product valuenode (PR `#1260 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1260>`_).
* Fixed issue with saving `loop` flag in some dynamic lists (`#2165 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2165>`_).
* Fixed SVG importer ignoring some style properties set as attributes and fixed a lot of memory leaks (`#2137 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2137>`_).
* Fixed crash in rare cases caused by race condition when rebuilding LayerTreeStore (`#2209 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2209>`_).
* Fixed issue when Widget_Vector do not uses locale for decimal separator (PR `#2102 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2102>`_) (`#2157 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2157>`_).
* Don't show extra vertical scrollbar for Dock Sound (PR `#1173 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1173>`_).
* Fix missing is_distance hint for vertex coordinates (PR `#2000 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2000>`_).
* Fixed problem with missing \*.glsl files in distribution (`#1982 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1982>`_).



