.. _release-1.4.1:

############################
Synfig 1.4.1 Release Notes
############################

Synfig Studio 1.4.1 delivers some improvements and critical bugfixes. Please read below for details.

Features
--------------
* Synfig now can export videos with sound (`#1623 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1623>`_, `#1830 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1830>`_). In previous versions Synfig was ignoring all Sound Layers in animation file when doing export to video format. Now all sounds are mixed and added into video file.

Windows-specific fixes
----------------------
* Fixed Synfig window not showing after closing it in minimized state (`#1973 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1973>`_).
* Fixed issue of rendering to file when using non-Latin filenames (`#2011 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2011>`_, `#1940 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1940>`_).
* Fixed incorrect import of lst files when path contains non-Latin characters (`#1924 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1924>`_).
* Fixed non-working command "Edit image editing in external tool..." (`#1912 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1912>`_).
* Fixed problem with non-working plugins when loading them from path containing non-Latin characters (`#1882 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1882>`_).
* Fixed saving/loading palette to file with non-Latin name (`#1889 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1889>`_).

MacOS-specific fixes
----------------------
* Fixed issue with Synfig not starting if SynfigStudio.app was renamed (`#1834 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1834>`_).

Bugfixes
--------------
* Fix Duplicate Layer ignoring all layers but the first one (`#1829 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1829>`_).
* Fixed crash when frame fails to render (`#1861 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1861>`_).
* Fix loading of Average Converter type (`#1955 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1955>`_).
* Fixed interpolation for parameters of Boolean type (`#1826 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1826>`_).
* Fixed crash when user attempts to drag-and-drop layer while renaming (`issue #540 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/540>`_).
* Do not show "Link to Spline" menu item when a vertex of spline itself is selected (`#1988 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1988>`_).
* Fixed crash when right-clicking on group in the Sets panel (`#1920 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1920>`_).
* Fixed crash in Spline Tangent converter (`#1836 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1836>`_).
* Fixed crash in Spline Vertex converter (`#1802 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1802>`_).
* Fixed crash on unsuccessful action with a clean undo history (`#1643 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1643>`_).
* Fixed issue with duplicating Duplicate Layer (`#1971 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1971>`_).
* Avoid possible random crashes related with non-unique node identifiers (`#2029 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2029>`_).


UI/UX improvements
------------------
* Allow to use Ctrl+C/Ctrl+V/Ctrl+A shortcuts in Color and Gradient Dialogs (`#1821 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1821>`_).
* Fix layer duplication action for cases when group selected together with its children items (`#2050 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/2050>`_).
* Waypoint Editor dialog now shows TCB options only if current point has TCB type (`#1182 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1182>`_).
* Change order of Waypoint Editor buttons to match other dialogs (`#1880 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1880>`_).
* Waypoint Editor now properly handles parameters of Enumerated type (`issue #1965 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/issues/1965>`_).
* Fix issue with closing some configuration dialogs: changes were applied anyway, as if "OK" button was pressed (`#1573 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1573>`_).
* The "View" -> "Toolbar" menu item now active and usable (`#1386 <https://github.com/synfig/synfig/pull/1386>`_).
